## AmpliconReconstructor (AR)
Reconstructs complex variation using BioNano optical mapping data. We are currently in the process of publishing this work.

#### Prerequisites
AR uses Python 2.7 and C++11 (with g++ as the C++ compiler) and a Unix-based OS. AR has been tested on Ubuntu 16.04 and Ubuntu 18.04.

Generally a version of Python including commonly used scientific libraries (such as Anaconda) will be sufficient as the only Python dependencies are Matplotlib 2.0.0 (or higher) and numpy.

AR accepts breakpoint graphs formatted in the AmpliconArchitect (AA) format. AR has only been tested on breakpoint graph files generated by AA, so it is generally assumed that AA is installed, though technically this should not be a true prerequisite.

AR can produce visualizations of the reconstructed amplicons, this requires the CycleViz utility, which is available at https://github.com/jluebeck/CycleViz.

#### Installation
To install AR, please add the following variables to your .bashrc file (located in your home directory). We provide some bash commands to automate this process.

After cloning/downloading the AR source, **enter the AmpliconReconstructor directory**, `cd AmpliconReconstructor/`, and execute the following.

- Add AmpliconReconstructor and SegAligner to path

`echo "export AR_SRC=$PWD" >> ~/.bashrc`

`echo "export SA_SRC=$PWD/SegAligner" >> ~/.bashrc`

- Make the SegAligner binary, run the following

`cd SegAligner`

`make`

- Add AR python libs to PYTHONPATH variable

`echo "export PYTHONPATH=$PYTHONPATH:$AR_SRC >> ~/.bashrc"`

- Make the changes to .bashrc live for this session

`source ~/.bashrc`

`echo $AR_SRC`

`echo $SA_SRC`


#### Usage
AR requires a number of inputs. To simplify running AR, we use a wrapper script `AmpliconReconstructorOM.py`, and we use a YAML file to specify the sample-specific files and paths AR will use. Information about creating the YAML file with your inputs (including a template) is located in the section "Preparing your files".

An example invokation of AR is as follows

`python AmpliconReconstructorOM.py -i samples.yaml --outdir your_directory --run_name your_runname --threads 24 `

A descripton of other command line arguments can produced by running AR with the `--help` flag.

#### Preparing your files
Once AA has been run on your NGS data, please convert the resulting "\_graph.txt" file to CMAP form, using the script `generate_cmap.py`.

A sample .yaml template is included in the AR source directory.

The .yaml file should specify the following properties for each entry (sample name)


```
sample_name:
	path: /some/path/to/your/samples/      - Path prefix which will be applied to all other input filenames

	graph: sample_graph.txt                - AA-formatted breakpoint graph file. Assumes "graph" is located under "path".

	contigs: sample_EXP_REFINEFINAL1.cmap  - assembled OM contigs. Assumes "contigs" is located under "path".

	cmap: sample_graph_DLE1.cmap           - in-silico CMAP generated from AA-formatted graph file

	instrument: [Irys/Saphyr]

	enzyme: [BspQI/DLE1]

	min_map_len: ~                         - set a custom minimum number of labels for SegAligner alignment [advanced option]

	xmaps: ~                               - provide a .xmap-formatted file of alignments between "cmap" and reference genome. Disables SegAligner alignment [advanced option]
```

#### Running an AR test
You can test AR on using previously published data. The GBM39 cell line has been previously characterized by AR in [Wu, et al., <em>Nature</em>](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-019-1763-5). We have made WGS data and OM data publicly available:

- [GBM39 WGS data](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/SRX2006441[accn])


- [GBM39 OM data](https://submit.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/subs/supfiles/SUB6698144/overview) (.cmap file)

You may either generate an AA breakpoint graph from the WGS data yourself (see [PrepareAA](https://github.com/jluebeck/PrepareAA) for details) or we also provide the pre-generated GBM39 AA breakpoint graph file in the AR data repo (AmpliconReconstructor/test_files/ if you do not want to try running AA yourself.

An example .yaml file is provided in the test_files directory. By default AR will not produce CycleViz images unless either the `CV_SRC` bash variable is set (CycleViz installation) or `--CV_path /path/to/CycleViz/` is specified.

To run the test, do 

`cd test_files`

`python $AR_SRC/AmpliconReconstructorOM.py -i gbm39_test.yaml --outdir GBM39_AR_output --run_name GBM39_test --nthreads [num threads]`

### SegAligner
SegAligner is a multi-threaded C++ aligner for BioNano optical map contigs and in-silico digested genomic reference segments. It additionally supports alignment of contigs to the full reference genome to identify the location of candidate regions of the contigs belonging to regions of the reference. 


SegAligner is wrapped inside AmpliconReconstructorOM, but can be invoked on its own. For installation please see the instructions for AR installation above.


Command line arguments for SegAligner are as follows - the first two arguments are positional and are paths to (1) the in-silico reference genome CMAP (full or collection of extracted segments) and (2) the BioNano contig CMAP. The most simple command would be:

`SegAligner your_reference_segs.CMAP EXP_REFINEFINAL1.cmap`

However, there are other arguments you will probably want to consider: 

- `-nthreads=1` Sets the number of threads to use (default 1, HIGHLY recommend at least 8 for typical datasets).

- `-prefix=SA_output` Sets the filename output prefix (default "SA_output")).

- `-min_labs=10` Sets the minimum number of labels on a cmap entry in order to attempt alignment (default 10. For Saphyr DLE1 data, recommend 12).

- `-n_detect_scores=500` Set the number of in the E-value distribution (default 500).

- `-gen=2` Set the "generation" of BioNano instrument. "1" = Irys, "2" = Saphyr (default 2).

- `-local` Perform local alignment (default semi-global).

- `-fitting_aln` Performs fitting alignment (conflicts with `-local`). Not recommended for large datasets.

- `-no_tip_aln` Turns off sensitive search for overlapping alignments. 

- `-nl` Turns off banded alignment. Not recommended for large datasets (memory + speed issues).

- `-detection` Used for detection of contig locations in reference genome. Sets `-local_aln`, `-no_tip_aln`, and other internal variables.


